♪
♪ I-d-e-a-s ♪
♪ Ideas ♪
(Screaming)
>> She's a legend in performance
art.
(Screaming)
>> She's a kind of a beast, in a
good sense, of course.
>> Her work is incredibly
intense and full of suffering.
>> She is star status.
I'm a little bit in love with
her.
>> It's energy, it's energy,
it's energy.
>> NARRATOR: Marina Abramovic is
the best known performance
artist in the world.
From her shocking early work in
the 1970s, to her blockbuster
2010 show The Artist is
Present, she's redefined what
art can be and brought
performance into the
mainstream.
>> It's kind of interesting.
Go in.
>> Her latest project is based
in Athens, showcasing and
mentoring young performance
artists and revisiting some of
the key works of her
extraordinary career.
>> The artist must be beautiful.
>> Performance art is what it
says on the tin-- it's art that
is live performance.
The actual live event is the
artwork.
>> Material art, you see the
painting on the wall, you see
projection of the video
installation.
But performance is only about
experience, about feeling, and
that's the real difficulty
because that immateriality, it's
fleeting.
It's there, and then, it's gone.
>> It's part of the impulse
where the artist can be the work
of art as well as the initiator
of the work of art.
In a post-photographic age, she
wants to do it as directly as
possible, with her own body.
>> She's strong, fantastic woman
with this iron will.
There's been quite a lot of male
performance artists, you know,
famously shooting themselves,
Joseph Beuys in a room with a
wolf, you know, lots of
mythology.
I mean, she makes myths.
>> Abramovic works with an
almost demented dedication.
Her early performances were
often shocking and intensely
physical.
In 1974, she performed the now
legendary Rhythm 0-- a
ground-breaking six hour work
where she relinquished all
control to her audience.
>> There she was, at a table,
with 72 objects...
>> From knives to flowers...
>> ...barbed wire, olive oil...
>> TIM: ...pens to paint...
>> LOUISA: ...a loaded gun, and
she sat there, and for six
hours, anybody could do what
they wanted with them or her.
And by the end of it, I mean,
she was injured, her clothes had
been cut off, somebody had held
the gun to her head.
She showed in a way how brutish,
you know, any audience can
become.
>> My first performances in the
'70s, which had been completely
criticized, been terrible
articles in newspapers.
You know, considered as this is
not art at all.
>> She was breaking new ground
and problematic ground because
she was, you know, a gorgeous
looking woman, using her
gorgeous body.
I mean, those early performances
were extraordinary, and no one
else was doing them, no one else
was pushing themselves to that
limit.
>> She tortured herself.
She whipped herself.
She cut a star into her stomach
with a razor.
She passed out from lack of
oxygen in a fire piece.
These were extreme works.
She could have died.
>> There are people who are very
dismissive of performance art.
They've never seen a Marina
Abramovic performance and
they've never met her.
She'd soon put them right.
>> MARINA: An artist is given a
gift to create.
This gift is not his own.
He have to serve this gift.
I think suicide is unacceptable
because you're not allowed to
suicide if you have this kind of
gift because you have to go all
the way.
It's difficult and it's hard,
and that's why we--
responsibility.
To perform is to sacrifice all--
family, privacy, children,
whatever-- and there I am.
>> BOTH: Ahh...
>> Abramovic's work explores
extremes of human experience,
from violence, to ritual, to
love.
When she met fellow performance
artist Ulay in 1976, they
embarked on both a passionate
love affair and an intense
collaboration, producing scores
of seminal works, challenging
attitudes towards gender and
identity.
>> MARINA: We are kneeling face
to face, pressing our mouths
together.
Our noses are blocked with
filter tips.
>> Breathing in/Breathing Out
was one of their most famous
works.
The performance continued until
they were on the verge of
losing consciousness and could
no longer continue.
In 1983, they devised a piece
to cement their union, where
they would walk the Great Wall
of China, beginning from
opposite ends before meeting in
the middle, where they would
marry.
But by the time the necessary
permits had been issued by the
Chinese government, their
relationship had
disintegrated.
Instead, they decided to
undertake a spiritual journey
to end their partnership,
turning even their break-up
into a piece of performance
art.
Called The Lovers: The Great
Wall Walk, it was a work of
operatic proportions.
On 30th of March, 1988,
Abramovic set out from the Old
Dragon's Head where the eastern
end of the Great Wall meets the
Yellow Sea.
On the same day, Ulay began his
trek from the opposite end, at
the southwestern edge of the
Gobi Desert.
>> MARINA: I climbed the
Dragon's Back.
I can feel his spine, his
bloodstream pulsing under my
feet.
>> For three months, they walked
towards one another, until they
finally met, embracing before
parting ways forever.
>> MARINA: It is more dramatic,
more like a film ending than
actually having this romantic
story of two lovers.
>> After this, Abramovic chose
to work alone.
Her art would become more
theatrical and would demand
ever more from her audience.
Marina Abramovic is considered
the grand dame of performance
art.
Born in Belgrade, she pushes
the boundaries of both body and
mind, exploring themes of
violence, love and
spirituality.
>> I think I was born like this
because as soon as I had a
pencil and paper and paint, I
was painting all over my house.
There was no white wall left.
Much later, I remember very much
lying on the grass in a field
and looking up, and then, I see
out of nowhere, like, 13
military planes crossing the
sky.
So, they make these lines, you
know?
And I look these lines in a
maze; it was so beautiful and
abstract.
And then, after a while, the
lines disappear and it was just
blue sky, and I felt that that
was some kind of revelation.
I remember standing up, saying
to myself, "But this is crazy.
Why should I do something
two-dimensional when I can do
anything I want?"
So, I immediately went to this
military base and I ask there if
I can have 12 planes to make a
drawing.
And they called my father and
said, "Your daughter's
completely crazy.
You know how much it cost for
her to fly, you know, 12
military planes for drawings in
the sky?
Get her out of here."
I like to tell you the story
how we in Balkan kill the rats.
>> In 1997, at the Venice
Biennale, she used the agony of
the breakup of her homelands as
material for a visceral
performance piece called Balkan
Baroque.
(Upbeat classical playing)
>> The work was in the Italian
Pavilion-- which, if you go to
Venice, there's lots of little
pavilions with artists
working, this pavilion has
hundreds of artists working.
So, it's very easy for a piece
to get overlooked.
The smell hit you first.
(Singing in foreign language)
>> LOUISA: And there she was in
this dark space, sitting on this
huge pile of increasingly smelly
cow bones.
>> In white clothes, covered in
blood, scrubbing with a wire
brush on these bones, singing a
lament.
>> Trying to atone for the
atrocities that were taking
place just across the water.
Literally, you had the war
unfolding, the conflict within
iron earshot almost to Venice.
>> And this piece was so
important to me because this was
metaphor for the Balkan War.
>> And she's talked about
cleansing the conscience, as if
cleaning the bones, she could
clean away what happened.
>> Wow, it was difficult to do
it because it was the hottest
day in Venice, you know, 30
degree, the worms were coming
out of the bones, and I was
doing this six days, six hours
every single day.
>> I doubt anybody's put
themselves through what she has
done to explore the human
condition in the name of art.
You take many of the great
western artists, and it's that
unflinchingly direct way with
which they engage with human
brutality and mortality that
draws us to them.
>> Our life on this planet is so
incredibly difficult and there's
so much pain, and what is my
responsibility an artist?
I'm not politician, but what I
can do on my own to change
something or to change
consciousness?
>> Abramovic won the prestigious
Golden Lion for Balkan Baroque.
The art world had finally
caught up with her
uncompromising vision.
>> MARINA: I never give up.
First 30 years, you know, very
difficult life to get to that
point.
You know, only after 50, I could
pay my telephone and electricity
bills.
I live in the car.
And it was worth it, every
single moment, you know?
Nothing comes easy.
>> In 2010, MoMA in New York
hosted a retrospective, the
biggest exhibition of
performance art in its history.
>> I remember the curator, he
said to me, "I would like to
call this The Artist Is Present
and I would like to show the
video and photographic work
where you are present in the
piece."
And when he said that, you know,
he gave me idea of the
performance.
I said, "Well, then, I have to
be present in the space also for
the duration of the show."
>> For three months, six days a
week, eight hours a day,
Abramovic sat motionless in a
chair, as the public queued up
to sit opposite her and look
into her eyes.
>> If you sat opposite anybody
and stared into their eyes,
that's an incredibly powerful
thing.
But to stare into her eyes,
they're like deep wells of
history, of identity, of
melancholy, that it almost
throws that back at you and it
makes you look inside yourself.
>> MARINA: This chair in front
of me was never empty.
There was constantly amount of
people need to have this
experience.
And you sit there and you're
observed by me, but you're also
observed by the public and
you're also filmed and
photographed.
So, you're nowhere to escape,
except into yourself, and the
moment you get into yourself,
then all this, you know,
emotions come out.
It was like a volcano of
emotions to the public.
>> LOUISA: To be sitting every
day in a chair without going,
leaving, eating, peeing,
anything is huge.
I mean, she had to go into
training for that.
>> I mean, I can't sit still for
ten minutes without doing
anything.
Who can?
To be able to sit there and just
look and be...
>> It was like a NASA program
for the space, going to space.
I had to re-construct my own
system, physical.
I never eat lunch because, you
know, if I do this during all
day, eight hours and ten hours
on Fridays, that means that, you
know, lunchtime that your body
produce acids to digest, so that
can create headaches, very
unpleasant feelings if you don't
eat.
So, I didn't have lunch for one
year.
I also understood that, in the
performance, how little you
need.
You need actually nothing.
You just need to be there, 100%,
with yourself and projecting
that energy to the viewer.
I come out of that chair and I
was not the same anymore.
The transformation was
incredible.
Something really happened.
I understood the need of public
today not to look at something
but be part of something, and I
understood that our life is so
fast that we have to make our
art slower and slower.
>> It took four years for
Abramovic to come up with her
next piece-- 512 Hours-- for
London's Serpentine Gallery.
Here, she took her minimalist
approach to performance even
further.
>> It was actually an exhibition
where she did not prepare a
script.
There wasn't this idea of a
masterplan, which is
interesting.
She developed it all on the way.
>> And, you know, you're coming
to London, you're coming to the
place, you know, Damien Hirst
made the diamond skull-- which
is really a huge comment on the
art as being commodity.
And I was thinking, let's see
the other angle, let's see
something from emptiness, let's
see something from nothing.
>> All the materials that Marina
used were her own body and a few
props, and there she was in the
Serpentine every day, ten till
six.
People arrived, they literally
left their baggage--
psychological and literally at
the door.
You checked in your watch, your
mobile phone, all your bags.
>> It was very much ritual
because we would really give her
the key.
She would open then
ceremonially, at 10 o'clock, the
space, let people in, salute
them, greet them, welcome them,
as a ritual.
>> And in you went, and then,
whatever happened, happened.
>> Visitors were taken by the
hand and invited to slow down
with a range of meditative
acts-- from counting rice, to
simply staring at coloured
squares on the wall.
Some were even tucked into bed.
>> It was a very strange
experience.
It's something we haven't really
experienced since our childhood,
that someone would, you know,
put you to bed.
>> Because we don't do this in
our own real life.
I mean, nobody sit at home in a
chair and do nothing.
They will always do something.
We always want to get
information in our system-- you
know, look at the telephones,
get television, get the news,
you know, read newspaper.
But here is about emptying
yourself, is about giving out,
out, out.
There's not much happening.
You're not achieving anything.
You're just in the presence of
here and now.
So, with the public, you have to
connect the public with the
performer with that moment of
here and now.
There is no past, which already
happened.
Future didn't happen.
Nothing exists, just life
itself.
And that is the key.
>> Having won over a sceptical
British audience, she developed
these techniques into the
Abramovic Method-- a program
designed to enable audiences to
slow down, embrace the moments
and get into a state conducive
to fully appreciating
performance art.
>> I mean, the Abramovic Method
is a form of meditation and
immersion.
>> LOUISA: So, pink glasses
of water, counting grains of
rice...
>> MARINA: And they put the
headphones, way to block the
sound.
That headphones to block the
sound is a pretty good
invention, I have to say.
The headphones make you aware of
your heartbeat, which is
interesting about that is you
are together with the people,
but also alone in the same time.
But you kind of have collective
energy who helps you to get into
that state.
>> TIM: It's a loss of a sense
of self.
Paradoxically, a total
engagement with the self.
>> LOUISA: It's all rather more
kind of calm and sedate, in a
way, a journey of discovery for
the audience, as well as for
Abramovic herself.
All the things that she
espouses, really, have a lot to
do with Buddhism, have a lot to
do with mindfulness.
You know, she taps into a very
broad spectrum, and I think
people are hungry for that,
particularly young people.
>> MARINA: I feel that it is
right time because amount of
young people participating.
You know, my public is extremely
young.
I have people from 14 years old.
>> LOUISA: There's several
reasons, I think, why she's so
popular with young audiences.
I think we do live in a very
participatory, self-regarding
world-- you know, all of taking
selfies, everything's on the
phone, everything's kind of
instantaneous and constantly
performing for various cameras
and screens.
On the other hand, we live in a
very dematerialized world, where
everything is virtual-- you
know, friendships, romances are
all conducted on Facebook,
social media or whatever.
Abramovic is very much about,
you know, the simple here and
now, and I think, you know,
people crave that.
>> Marina Abramovic is known as
the "Godmother of Performance
Art."
Now approaching her 70th
birthday, she's ever more in
demand, both as an artist and
teacher.
Her current project is based at
the Benaki Museum in Athens,
showcasing young Greek
performance artists, at a time
when public funding for art
has been drastically cut.
>> I'm elated by the fact that
Marina Abramovic not only is
here, but is here with full
commitment and great love for
what she's doing here in Greece,
with a deep realization of the
environment and the psyche of
the Greek people in these times
of difficulty.
>> I'm not surprised when
somebody says, "Ooh, you know,
down there in Greece, you can't
pay your own salaries or
pensions, do you have time for
art?"
It's like there's plenty of
people flying from all over
Europe right now to visit the
show.
Culture is not a luxury.
Culture is an economic force.
>> Encompassing performance,
lectures, screenings and
workshops, the show is an
opportunity for Abramovic to
pass on her hard-won wisdom to
her students and audience
alike.
>> One thing that is very
important is to train young
performer.
Is not just everybody can
perform.
Is the same like a, you know,
you wanted to play Beethoven on
the piano, you can have a very
lousy piano player or you can
have the one who transcendents
you completely in an incredible
experience.
So, same with performer.
That energy with performer put
the piece, his own personal
thing, this will make piece
good or not.
>> Abramovic has been a pioneer
of re-performance-- allowing
younger artists to stage her
iconic works, bringing them to
fresh audiences decades after
their original conception.
>> I don't give permission for
the pieces who endanger the
life, which, I think, I was
responsible for my own life, but
I don't want to be responsible
for somebody else.
So, these, I do not give
permission.
But for any other pieces, I do.
Sometimes, I don't recognize my
piece re-performed.
But still, this artist gives
something new and beautiful, an
element, and I have to agree,
you know?
>> Artist must be beautiful.
Art must be beautiful.
Artist must be beautiful.
>> I'm not trying to imitate
Marina's performance or, you
know, to reproduce exactly what
she was doing.
And, I think, this is the most
important thing-- you know, to
take the shape and the idea of
an already existing work and
trying to put your own
experiences in the work.
It's a challenge, but it's a--
yeah, it's a good challenge.
(Speaking foreign language)
>> There's just the simple idea
of the piece was to have metal
comb and metal brush in your
hands and you brush the hair
very violently, repeating
constantly "Art must be
beautiful, artist must be
beautiful," until you're
actually giving completely
different expression because
your face is kind of damaged,
the hair is damaged and doesn't
look, you know, that good
anymore.
>> I do have a fear of how, you
know, it will be like when I do
it for two hours or even longer.
I have to say that, you know,
this brushing is quite
vigorous.
You lose a lot of hair.
It's not that you become ugly,
but there is this idea of
destroying your beauty or
however you want to call that.
Artist must be beautiful.
>> MARINA: And I don't think art
have to be beautiful.
Art have to be disturbing.
Art have to, you know, ask right
questions.
Art have to predict future.
So, not just beauty.
So, this was the idea in those
days of that work.
And then, work becomes some kind
of classic now that people are
performing.
It's important to be
re-performed because it's living
form of art.
That's the only way that this
work can survive.
>> LOUISA: She's always very
generous to other artists, I
think.
You know, she's very much the
great grand dame herself, but
also she spends a lot of time
with younger artists.
People can say, "Ooh, they're
acolytes just kind of forming
their own image."
But I think, actually, it's more
than that.
I think she is really passing on
these skills and these ways of
being able to kind of interact
with audiences and, indeed,
interact with yourself.
>> MARINA: Doesn't matter what
you leave behind in material
wealth.
It's really important what
people remember for, you know?
To me, it's all about
performance and it's all about
that kind of legacy.
>> She's nearly 70.
Everyone thought that The Artist
Is Present at MoMA would be the
last extreme performance she put
herself through.
I'd say watch this space.
>> Wherever Marina Abramovic
goes from here, there will be
one last piece of performance
art.
>> For my funeral, I have three
Marinas.
There will be three coffins.
Nobody knows which is real one,
but there are three of them,
placed in three different places
where I lived the longest--
which will be Belgrade,
Amsterdam and New York.
These three Marinas, you know,
I think, the one is, like, very
heroic and have courage and go
for it.
And another one is pretty
spiritual.
And the third one is really full
of bullshit life-- too much
chocolate and kind of vanity and
love fashion and all the rest.
And I think all three somehow--
you know, I was always ashamed
of one of them.
And now, I figure out that it's
the best thing is that actually
you accept them, which I did.
♪